The substantive necessity for a concept like cognitive warfare is derived from observed challenges for NATO, which can be broken down into two developments. First, technological progress and shifts in information consumption, wield adversaries' greater capacity to amass and manipulate data, sway emotions, and shape beliefs and behaviors. This enables the leveraging of societal divisions using novel technologies [e.g., artificial intelligence (AI), emerging & disruptive technologies, data harvesting], and the proliferation of social media influencing individuals' thoughts, emotions, and actions. As the authors themselves state, this mirrors hybrid warfare tactics, where adversaries target society as the vector to exert influence indirectly on key targets: political and military leaders. The effectiveness of influence campaigns is conceptualized to hinge on the calculated manipulation of emotions and cognitive predispositions to instigate widespread shifts in attitudes and behavior. These alterations are frequently nuanced, blurring the distinction between genuine societal debate and discord, and the hostile exploitation of societal divisions through cognitive attacks (NATO Allied Command Transformation, 2023).

Second, it is stressed that cognitive attacks are not new, however the concept defines them as deliberate offensive maneuvers aimed at influencing perceptions, beliefs, interests, decisions, and behavior by directly targeting the human mind. It is conceptualized that the innovation lies in the adversaries' ability to rapidly and anonymously carry out cognitive attacks within the Information Environment (IE) using digital platforms and emerging disruptive technologies (EDTs) (NATO Allied Command Transformation, 2023).

The focus on cognition and the human mind distinguishes the cognitive warfare concept from other concepts like hybrid threats, FIMI and disinformation, whose conceptualized effects often end at the acceptance or rejection of specific information or narratives. In cognitive warfare, the main effect of activities is conceptualized to lie in the manipulation of emotional and subconscious processes of the human mind. This is much more far-reaching than other related concepts like Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference (FIMI) or hybrid threats. The authors clarify that, “synchronized and coordinated attacks on emotions, thoughts and behaviors impact will, morale, decision-making and situational understanding” (NATO Allied Command Transformation, 2023). Furthermore, “Cognitive attacks are designed to use information to activate the subconscious processes in our brains, making it difficult for our conscious minds to perceive the presence of a cognitive threat” (NATO Allied Command Transformation, 2023). These factors constitute an approximation to the empirical referents that partly constitute the extension of the cognitive warfare concept.
